# Page 1
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.5605><y_0.4398># Latina and Latino Stars in U.S. Eyes
This is a book about Latina and Latino readers, but even more it is about the U.S. entertainment media imagining of Latino/s. In the case studies that follow. Interrogate the dynamics of star production and promu- tion for a handful of film and entertainment television stars since the silent films era and what we can learn from them about the evolution of Latina’s national identities in the American imagination (or “U.S. eyes”), as ill- tered through Hollywood film and star promotion. More specifically Talk: I love Save’s Latino opportunities and late images reflected as challenged the shifting status of Latina/s in relation to racist, class, and gendered notions, and nature of citizenship and national identity! And given that socialism- vertical and film and television industry controls have established radically different openings and opportunities for Latina/s actors at distinct junctions, what are Latino’s teachers teach us about three periods in Hollywood and in U.S. social life.
When I argue this project to split it seemed, on the surface at least, that Latina/s had reached a level of visibility, popularity, and status in English- language film, television, and popular culture that was unprecedented. Ricky Hartly war shaking the best look for television audiences, and “Licc” then known only as Jennifer Lopez, war drawing the spotlight with her acting achievements and celebrated body. While few Latino/s could be found on network television at the time, Hollywood films included a growing roster of well known Latina/s and Latin American stars including Lopez, Satua Hawk, Benicio del Tiron, and Jimmy Statis. Indeed, along with the fact that Latina/s were soon to surpass African Americans as the largest newsha

# Page 2
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3418><y_0.4047>group in the United States, mainstream news soccerry were also trampinging the news that Latinaio were becoming increasingly visible and influential in popular culture. Is a “Latin USA” over issue, Newwood announced the rise of ‘Generation N’, while New York magazine, renamed News: I feel for its own special issue, Israelabe! the recent “Latin explosion” in cultural life, sports, and politics.” Yet the success and grand-scale promotion of such perferences as Lopez and Martin was not the complete picture; the actual behind this agency operates and our promotion tests often did not match the optimism or the type regarding a later cause “Latin Wose”. As I electrue in more detail in chapter 4, hans of contradiction and marginalization could easily be discussed, whether is promotional costs that emphasized the various bodies and supposed innate seasonal earths of these perferers or to discussion of US, have Latinia as “Census” state.
I offer this quick glimpse of arccent moment in Latinia’s media representation as a way to demonstrate both the complexity of this research topic and the importance of pursuing it through in depth, historically contextualized study. Latinia’s images in the UK entertainment media have been nothing if one ambodies, reflecting the sibling and equally ambivalent social and social status of Mexican Americans and other Latinia’s in this country in the last century. For example, in most recent years it has become more likely that we may witness Latinia’s actors portraying richly textured chapters, such as that of college-bound texts, San Garcia, played by America Ferrero (now of Life Berry family) in Real Women Here Career (Loss). But our students still off me, overwhelmingly, that they feel that negative and stereotypical images continue to be rame the users thus the exception. And they know all too well the age-old stereotypes, given useful labels by Charles Ramize Berg and others the Latin here, the handelochholzels, the leader or spetice, and so on. These sorts of one-dimensional images continue to be seen and to carry weight today, even as some Latinia’s actors and media professionals are experiencing greater opportunity.
The exploration of Latinia’s opportunity and standard promises to be informative far beyond the study of media representation, moreover. This is because such images have power. An Richard Dyer most famously has argued and other scholars have since documented, media representation and stardons in particular provides important and selling clues regarding the conceptualistic nature of a people within a society, as well as playing a role in relation between various groups. Not only have they provided images in most Latinia of who and other Latinia’s might be but ever like decades they have provided images to people at Latin discovery that can affect how we out ourselves and what we can make of our lives.
To provide parameters and focus to my research on this complex topic, I instructors my study several ways. First, I look a questions regarding the underlying reach status of Latinia through the lens of film and television standards with understanding that it is a forum through which ethnic notions and racial borders are mentioned, challenges, and otherwise made meaningful. Given this understanding, a great deal can be learned regarding the media construction of Latinidad (called I team" Hollywood Latinidad" to describe the industries/' construction of a collective, imagined “Latin new" through media products and any philosophy) from exploring the careers and media texts produced in relation to popular Latina and Latin stars in previous era and today. It also can much as a great deal about Latinidad as defined by Franco/ Applicon and Bonus, Chinese Riverman, referring to Latinia’s identity formation through lived experience by Latinia themselves. They refine the term as “Latitude” to refer to the Spanish in relation to the diverse communities and identities that comprise Latinia’s identities in the United States and internationally. Thus, both Hollywood Latinidad and Its potential influence on Latinidades are the focus of this book.
My study is not encyclopedic, however. It does not aim to address the experiences of all Latinia’s stars or to document the entire career of the stars that serve as case studies. Rather, I further structured this book by situating my case studies within transitional moments in media and US, social history and what can be gleaned from them with respect to Latinia’s representation and stardons. In this evolution there have been important business in media history with respect to Latinia’s opportunity and representation, for instance, they include the attention from effort to sound film in the landscape, the same area of socially relevant television, and the period when the first Latinian-directed feature films reached national audiences in the raph. In addition, sociographical developments that had an equally influential impact and which I address in the chapters that follow include the Great Depreciation, World War II, and the rise of Chizano and Puerto Rico media working targeting US, television networks and film studies. These periods and events affected area, although not necessarily better opportunities in Latinia’s specific formers, times and spaces in which popular motions of Latinidad and how Latinia should be represented in the entertainment media were brought to attrition or called late question.
Structuring the chapters in this way provides an abbreviated overview of the historical evolution of Latinia’s representations and stardons in Hollywood Film and U.S. entertainment television, major components of what I turn Hollywood Latinidad. I hold here on the work of Jan M. Lopez, who aptly described Hollywood as a cultural ethnographer, figuratively creating
<unknown>

# Page 3
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3418><y_0.4164>race and ethnicity through its cinematic representations of various groups." As López, illustrates in her work on Latina stars of the “Good Neighbor” era, such images are embedded within and reflect the ideology and material realities of their social and historical moment.
To this end, Latina’s New in U.S. Type: The Making and Meetings of Film and TV-Standard explore the evolution of Latina’s and American identi ties as evidenced in transitional moments in U.L. media history and Latina’s or who became stars in those moments. Chapter 1 is centered on Mexican actress Dakersi Del Rio, whose Hollywood film career from you through the early years operated the transition from silent to sound like. Chapter 2 then examines the career of Cuban mission, actor, and television executive Deal Arnas, who, after appearing in “Good Neighbor” films in the space, became an extremely popular television actor in and executive producer of the supra-Mt series Lore Easy Chapter 1 survey the only decades (topra and 1960x) of the film career of Puerto Rican preferner Bira Monos, who witnessed the breakdown of the media system and the rise of independent film companies. The attention in chapter 4 terms in Puerto Rican and German Hungarian actor Freddie Prima, who quickly rose to random in the title role of BBC's China and the Asia (gray, 78), but not without intense controversy and complaints from Chacao media activists and other viewers. Chapter 3 then holds the focus in Mexican actor Edward James Olmo, who became a symbol of Latin filmmaking in the gobles. In chapter 6, the focus in Nepepean actress, singer, and franchise head family Lanes, who rise to mainstream student amidst the growth of Latina/s media production and the news medial discrete construction of “consors” standard in the late ages. Finally, in chapter 5 investigates the impact of millennial trends that have emphasized mixed race heritage and ethically ambiguous characters on Latina’s opportunity and random through an exploration of the career of across Pastica Alba and comparison to her contemporary, Rosario Davon.
Readers may consider at some of these choices. While some of these actors may never have reached major star siaic, each exemplified success for a perfection of Latina’s heritage in his or her respective historical junction and media era. Their diversity with respect to gender, animality, training, class background, appearance, and career states also allows for explanation of questions regarding the coordinates and at times privileging of particular Latina’s groups in Latina’s representation and star promotion, the diversity and disparity of opportunities experienced by Latina’s actors over the decades, and the impact of increasingly past Latino identities today. The inclusion of both film and television stars also allows for comparative analysis
of the opportunities and limitations afforded by each media industry at different historical functions, shooting greater light on the complex evolution of Latina’s standard and of the Hollywood media industry is more general imagining of Latidad.
## Stardom and the American Imaginary
The makes here are about more than entertainment. They’re about little are able to divide inside our imaginations and only
– Atual Heart Essays, Color by Fire: The Fire Network and the Revolution in Black Vanderbie New York, Oxford University
Pursu, 19900, 64
As scholars such as Richard Dyne George Lipitz, and Elis Shelter and Robert Ibm have well documented, media representatives play a powerful role in American and global social relations. We can look to the entertainment media as one of the most important places where “Afres, royalty, fictions, ideologies, and social models are produced, displayed, negotiated, and continued,” us. Charles Sandered Macher has argued, and rare on his human and heroisms that populate and incorporate this landscape. In this regard, stardom operates on a national and increasingly global scale as powerful social form. Since, – the lack of data from particular groups in a society, “read” millions of identity and leadership to citizens from all walks of the French including known regarding the meaning of gender, class, men, and ethnicity in a particular time and place. For example, state’s public images have long-out interest in the rutilization and endorsement of U.S. social categories and particularly in the construction and celebration of witnesses. In this regard, adolescents traditionally has been filtered to such qualities as parts, beauty, and integrity--and perhaps more important, to the various privileges and rights inherent to American citizenship and identity.” Scholars have documented the reinforcement of such notions of whiteness, to list art a few examples, in relation to stardom associated with vendville theater performances and early Hollywood files.
I should note here that I see terms such as “whiteness” and the more general True? with the understanding that social categories are not biological constructs, but rather categories that have been constructed socially, as described by Michael Omi and Howard Wissant and others." When specifically, race historically low were constructed in relation to a black white, when binary in the United States. As Neil Didry points out, such a history was made possible only because “the United States... repulsulate the idea of racial hybridity

# Page 4
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3477><y_0.4141>for most of its history?”) as a result, the United States has had “no cultural or legal context for understanding the racial place of marina peoples” such as Latinia/a.” Consequently, there is continuing confusion regarding the status of Mexican American and other Latinia/a as socialized citizens, and whether we should be considered a separate new or an ethnic group even today.”
Moreover, studies have documented the importance of film and media stars in role models and as influential to the establishment of cell-image and social attitudes toward other groups." We learn from each role models what out of a life we can hope far. Basically what to appear to, as well as what to think of others and to expect others will think of us. Will others think write smooth, capable, trustworthy, and attractive, or unintelligent, entrepreneurty, and/or unattractive? These are powerful messages that can play determining roles in the future of all young people and in social relations between ethnic groups. A greater understanding of the construction and marketing of stars from nondominant ethnic and racial groups, such as Latinia/a within the context of the United States, therefore can reveal a great deal about the prevailing racial attitudes and social relations of a time and place.
And what is standard? Scholars such by Christine Giddell’s father film and television stars as actors who become the object of public facilitation to the extent that their lives of actors are as interesting to laws as their performances."13] would add that the opportunity for an actor to attain fair states generally comes with being cast in psychologically compelling land rules, as well as through being given “not treatment?” publicity to the entertainment media. When we consider stardom from this perspective, the odds appear stacked against Latinia/a to more respects. Although the number of Latinia/a television and film roles has increased in the last decade, there are still five ‘Hispanic characters that are well-developed preenagonists around which stories resolve. In the realm of television representation, studies have documented that Latinia/a characters have only recently increased from a to 6 percent of all prime titles," even while the Latinia/a population has grown to is percent of the US population. Those characters that do appear typically are in minor rather than starting roles.
This lack of validity and substance in film and TV story worlds devotals with the relative death of Latinia and Latino ones, when you consider that opportunity to attain state status typically emerges from being cast in well- developed land rules. While studies, networks, production companies, and related industries spend millions each year to range and postnatal sizes than they will appeal to the widest possible audience, Latinia/a still are seldom the effect of such presentation. Given how first Latinia/a images are circulating in
the popular imagination, these images, of both performers and characters, arguably hold more important and are more heavily judged, given that they carry what figure: Babbán, Scheya Merce, and others have second a burden of representation."5
“It is especially useful how to explore the meaning and significance of these dynamics in popular culture: The burden of representation experienced by Latinia and Latino stars can be seen as growing heavier as they represent an increasing population. In this respect, the proportion of Latinia/a in the United States has more than implied, from a percent of the population in the sales to an estimated is percent in most, while Latinia/a comprise one in five US youth index.”Scholars are just beginning to critically examine the impact of this populations shift on the media landscape and on US, social life and identity.
Perhaps as an early reflection of these shifts, the rising status of a handful of Latinia and Latinia in US, film and television also makes the type of Latinia/a stadium particularly timely. Atters such as femilio Lopez, Basicid Tiro, America Ferreira, and George Lepe have gained critical recognition and status in the last decade, while Latinia/a filmmakers and producers are successfully launching films and television series, signs of an increasingly visible and powerful “Latiniosa/cored”TM within the latistically white media production and size system. Should the recess of those individuals be taken as a sign of improvements the Latinia/a in Hollywood with respect to opportunist, creative agency, or key premians? While this has yet to be determined, Latinia and Latina stars likely will have increasing visibility and impact.
The Racial Riddle and Other Twils of Latinia/a Stardom
The first wave of scholars to study Latinia/a stardom have laid an important foundation on which World here; they include but are not limited to Charles Ramino Berg, Ann M. Lippe, Chen Norzega, Class E. Rodrigues, Anglonal Valdivira, and Gary Keller.7 For use, Latinia/a film and television representatives with heavily on nations of appearance and race that have dictated bifurcation of opportunity for Latinia/a where those who might be potential stars, and those who will only be cast in minor and character roles, regardless of talent. In fact, over the last century round Latinia/a stars have hair fate skin and European phenotypic features (body type, facial features, hair type, etc.). Antonio Rose Binsomeer and Clara E. Hodgare, for example, have documented how creating opportunities in the first decades of US, film were dependent on how classic Latinia/a performers embedded each “white”

# Page 5
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3438><y_0.4164>beauty and body shields." Interviews that I conducted with Latina's actors and media professionals as part of my research confirmed that this sort of typing has diminished only slightly. The transition rates of Hollywood casting generally include the necessity for Latina's star hopefish to have light tea skin and European rather than indigenous features, the ability to speak English well and without an “understandable” accent, and that they be of medium to tell height such a skin hold.
In addition, Rodríguez peelens cast that fair skimmed, blonde, and blue-eyed Latino actors and structures, the floor of darker caliber caliber, typically are not considered for Latina's virus, by Hollywood standards they do not have what the terms the preferred." Latina look." These norms have broadened slightly in recent years, however, as ‘kindful’ of Latina's action of flatter skin tones and more indigenous phenotypic features are finding acting opportunities. Across Rosario Dressoat, who is of Puerto Rican, Alex Cohen, Irish, and Native American descent, and comedian and actor George Lopez, which is Mexican American, are two illustrations of this trend.
Complicating the process of racialization that Latina's actors experience is the phenomenon of cultural racialisation. As scholars such as Boggaytar- Tanzberg garabile, cultural modification does then the dynamics by which history Americans in the United States have been categorized as nominate based on such factors in language: accent, cultural practices, and class differences, rather than appearance." Similarly, Latina's actors have been categorized (i.e., for example, ‘Latita,’ "Hispanic), or ‘white,’) based on class-related associations related to such factors as family background, accent, comport- ment, and body language, as much as appearance. For example, as Aluis Rodriguez-Firrale documents, Mexican born, far skimmed across Lepa Viter experienced more intense racialisation in Hollywood in the late years than fifteen Mexican Dolores Del Bia, all start in part because of her personnel working class background." Those dynamics use of no minor importance; grants the equation of citizens with citizenship and off-to-attract rights in the United States, whether Latin and Latino stars have been constructed to obtain, soorbite, or subdominant, cultures or foreignes or various justic- tures arguably has had a professional impact not only on film, television, and their images but also on public attitudes, and thus on social institutions and legislation that made a difference in the lives of U.S. Latina/so.
In addition, it has been argued that when it comes to Latina's actors, some any perceived to be more appealing by film and television casting again, producers than others, with nationality and other elements of ancestry fac- turing in to these dynamics. Are From in chapter 1, for example, Dolores Def
Both promotion in the late years showcased her Spanish ancestry and to an extent developed her Mexican nationally. More recently, Spanish actors Antonio Bandeira and Prendora Cras have been among the most barely typed Latina's stars, despite the fact that many U.S. Latina do not include Spanish in their definition of Latina identity because of their European status. Anglaral Valdivia has easily documented this privileging of Spanish nationality in Hollywood version of Lattaided." Acters who have already became stars in Latin American countries also have often been privileged over "home-goer". Latina/so by eating directors, as my interviews in the industry here out. Mexico Americans in particular have been underpre- sorted among Latina's stars, despite the fact that they are the largest Latina's group in the United States, comprising 9A percent of the Latina's population in recent years.
The climate of a particular social era also necessarily has an influence the status of Latina's in the racial hierarchy of the United States--and thus within the mains of popular entertainment--has evolved in relation to historical and social developments. An selection of Latina's history have documented. Latina/so have been considered "maybe, sometimes white" based on what is most politically useful to those in power of particular structures." In turn, Latina/so occurs have fixed greater or lower opportunity in Hollywood during various periods. Even in which Latin column see the effect of interest among mainstream Americans and in which a "Latina look" has been considered par- tically beautiful low-weight about pools in opportunistically. A one-to-year is the substantially more welcoming and open site system that come Latina/so encountered in the last years of client claims in the mid- to late years. In this period, a range for the foreign and competition, including the popularity of Spanish fantasy heritage mythology, contributed to audience interest in stars considered Latin loans, as ‘Andres in Chapter 2. Similarly, President Franklin S. Bonoselly Good Neighbor policy of the late years prompted increased interest in Latin and Latino performances with musical abilities, One-Satino, the subject of chapter 3, found openings in Hollywood film and U.S. advec- sions because of this trend. Does each "Latin explanations" have often typically involved ambition/media representation and any promotion, however.
Finding opportunities to be cost in roles is only one element of Latina's representation and random, moreover, ‘‘Hollywood offers a capitalized’ on the economic possibilities of difference,’’ as Hosmer Heidifield agrees," and the star image contracted for soorbite stars historically have explained to some extent on the employment of stereotypical associations--both those considers ‘positive’ and ‘negative--old by whites of soorbite and white
Foreer in goy!

# Page 6
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3428><y_0.4086>ethnic groups.<sup>26</sup> Such has often been the case in the marketing of Latino's stars. These promotional tendencies have included individual and consult- tertiary diseases regarding race, ethnicity, and difference as considered relevant for promoting Latina and Latino star hopefuls typically through deliberate measures by media producers, publications, management personnel, and active themselves in hopes of adding to the potential itat's unique appeal.
For example, in this periods when Latino's have been presented or stars, the utilization of "youngalar" types, association associations with Latin America as always insidying "heat, evidence, opinion, and space.<sup>27</sup> Has often flawed their promotion in UK; audiences, it has been argued by France, Aparticis and Susana Chives-Silverman that such associations always imply Harris American superiority, even while purposefully celebrating Latin America.<sup>28</sup> With respect to Latino's stars, a tropicalist about on their pro- motion has often resulted in stars being referred to as "tarry" and "bar" and given such labels as "spellers" and "perpepperses." While these tendencies are perhaps most associated with Curranx Mercado and Latin manuals of the Great Neighbour film cycle, they have long been intrinsic to Hollywood Latu- dial, to the extent that they are seldom noticed or questioned. For example, Rick Martin was photographed inside a life-size firerocker in rats without common, while almost fifty years later. Ricky Martin was showed on the cover of Entertainment Weekly under the headline "Coltingent".<sup>29</sup>
Such associations have often been extended to the Latini and particularly the Latinia star body. The image of the carriacus, hyperstranked Latinia star is an entrenched topic of latina chromatic representation. Although for actors of all ethnic backgrounds, "we sellie" Latino's action appear to have the most difficulty escaping prolific that labels them as exceptionally and intently easy, or as having excessively easy and/or subprime solitarious bodies. The media donation with Jennifer Lopez’s year end in the late spine, a tape of chapter 4, serves as a vital case in point retrospective explanation of her pre- decimation/ camera demonstrates that this is not a new phenomenon. Related notions of personality and social status also have been refinced through such typical discourse. Latino's perfection in this manner have been promoted to the non-Latino public, primarily as pneumatic, hovling bodies with little intellectual or moral substance.
Latina/o Star Hopeful: Behind the Scene
Also important to consider are the corporate structures and climate behind the scenes in the film, television, and talent management industries that have
as impact on active being provided (or not being provided) opportunities to demonstrate whether they possess the intangible qualities that might support students. These include the challenges that active face when they try in women agents and other management personnel, be cast in roles, and he promoted as stars. While a handful of Latino's actors have achieved success, it still extremely difficult for most to break into the industry or find substantial employment as has been documented most recently in a says Emma River Policy Institute (TRP) study commissioned by the Scenes Action Guide.<sup>35</sup>
In this respect, students is a phenomenon that cannot be separated from its production, and in particular from the decisions on the part of execu- tions to promote a world-be state. Schedules such as Gil Branston, Rafael L. Chanson, and Barry King aims to be "Self-shifting prophes" in Branston’s words, inherent in the promotion of stars and hit films.<sup>36</sup> With respect to those dynamics, the long term instability of Latino to the film, advac- sion, and promotes industries, particularly in executive circles, combined with a seven under-representation of Latino's in writer and other creative positions, arguably plays into a Hollywood ruled out that soldiers outside Latinia's worth the financial investment of star promotion.
In coming to a never manned understanding of the situation that Latino's actors face, however, it is important to make a distinction between these actors and the Latino's character that popular film and adversaries mayworlds. Acters of course, are limited only by Hollywood's society's norms with respect to cross-cultural portrayals, while Latino's characters can be and have been portrayed by actors of any racial or ethnic designation. As Sarah Berry points out, drawing on Shubat and Stant, a “exiculated politics of eating” exists,<sup>37</sup> which has historically limited the acting representative for Latino's and other actors deemed namedine. Charles Ramirez Berg describes this dynamic with respect to Hollywood narrative traditions. Here and here- ties roles have historically been the exclusive domain of the white actors and activists, whilst Latino's and other actors deemed somewhat have typically been cast as villaints, sideticks, and temporary love interests.” While this paradigm is occasionally understapped today, there were very few exceptions in Hollywood's classical era and thus few opportunities for Latino's actors to prove whether they might have star appeal. Currently, cross- cultural port- tryals by white actors in Latino's who have until recently been acceptable. More substantial, "Star making" Latino's roles in fact were often played by Anglo actor during the diamond Hollywood era. The role of Puerto Rican immigrant Maria in West Sale Story (pahr), played by Natalie Wood, and of Mexican revolutionary leader Emiliano Zapans, played by Marlon Brando in
Cayola

# Page 7
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3428><y_0.4156>Voor Zapandel (1965), are just two cases in point: Other Angliacons who have played Latinicas its broadcaster over the decades include Charleston House, Rentz Davis, Malonera, Paul Mani, and Maria Simon.
When Latinicas actors have portrayed Latinicas characters, their rules and star promotion have influenced by age-old patterns in Latinicas representation. As I explain throughout the first chapters of this book, this has included such tendencies as the inaccurate confidates of disparate Latinicas cultures and the stereotypical representation of Latinicas is highly sexual, comi, adventure, and/or criminal Russian Begg’s description of Latinicas and Latino film roles at Latini rivers, bandedos, karkers, and shows upily describes the majority of such rules." Malonia, borrowing a term from Gagle Tachham, describes such stereotypes and obstructions to being cut as active protagonists as an example of the “Arabic annotation”. But Latinicas have historically expressed in the mainstream world. This is some of these patterns are shifting traces off remain in contemporary representations and star promotion.
This is not to say that Latinicas have been passive victims throughout the decades with respect to media representation and participation in the Del- Allywood Industries, however, Mexican Americans and other Latinicas have presented designing news coverage and media representation in the United States since at least the only twentieth century at land 2. Latinicas has noted, with Latinicas media advocacy focused on the film studies and works reaching a peak in the last series and early six years." They have also worked to become filmmakers, television producers, and other media professionals on both independent and mainstream projects and as such to gain creative games over such representations. The dedication and hard work of Latinicas media activists and filmmakers, as I discuss in more detail in chapters 4 and 5, has profoundly influenced how Latinicas have come to be represented and possibilities that Latinicas actors now face in the mainstream media environment.
Organization of This Book
As noted earlier, this study analyzes the evolution of Latinicas films and television representation and its reflection of the broader social status of Latinicas, through the lives of enlusted readers. To do so, Elave on His Brokel conception of “abeticities in relation” to studying Latinicas students in relation to revolving notions of whiteness and national identity and to the social and industrial history and climate in which these dynamics of star production, presentation, and reception have been embodied." In particular, I examine
the individual and industrial choices and structures that have influenced opportunities for and orchestrated the career trajectories of individual Latinicas stars in US, media and social history.
This topic, however, introduced a number of research challenges. Stadors, as a multifaceted phenomenon that includes the production of media texts and star policity tests, the performance of the public image by the celebrity, and critical and audience response, can be difficult to reconstruct and study. An Joshua Cameron notes, this is a subject that bridges the realism of both institutional and interpretive analysis, making it difficult to research adequately through a single research method."
For the reason, I contributed a number of methodological approaches in my research. These approaches included archival research at a number of locations around the country. Those sites included the Margaret Harris's Library of the Academy of Melissa Pician Arts and Sciences, the Fabry Center for Media (formerly the Museum of Television and Radio in Los Angeles), the Harry Ramont Center for the Illumination at the University of Texas A Austin, the Cinema Television Library at the University of California, the UCLA Film and Television Archive, and the Center for Film and Television Research at the University of Wisconsin. At those archives I studied film, television, and any promotional materials, focusing in particular no promotional poetry, publicity skills, film exhibitions’ press books, studies produced biographies, magazines and magazine and newspaper articles about the stars in question and floor parts. The Margaret Harris's Library at the Academy of Melissa  Art and Sciences, with its reticulous archive of star and film related materials, proved to be a particular treasurer move in this regard.
My work also included study of critical and popular reception, such as evidenced in film and television reviews, but affect figures, television ratings, and so on. In addition, I engaged in critical analysis of the stars’ films and/or television episodes when available, viewing some at libraries and articles when they were not commercially available. Some of Old Eitsn silent films, Moreno’s B-Films of the types, and episodes of China and the Asia, for example, were viewed at the Film and Television Archive of UCLA and the Museum of Television and Radio.
I also conducted interviews with Latinicas professionals working in the film and talent management industries (including producers, actors, writers, casting direction, and an apart) and engaged in participant observationwork related in Latinicas star promotion activities in Los Angeles. Much of this week was made possible through an intensely at the trade central Latin (feat and by participating in music sponsored by Newton, Latinicas sector).
This is not to say that Latinicas have been passive victims throughout the decades with respect to media representation and participation in the Del- Allywood Industries, however, Mexican Americans and other Latinicas have presented designating news coverage and media representation in the United States since at least the only twentieth century at land 2. Latinicas has noted, with Latinicas media advocacy focused on the film studies and works reaching a peak in the last series and early six years. They have also worked to become filmmakers, television producers, and other media professionals on both independent and mainstream projects and as such to gain creative games over such representations. The dedication and hard work of Latinicas media activists and filmmakers, as I discuss in more detail in chapters 4 and 5, has profoundly influenced how Latinicas have come to be represented and possibilities that Latinicas actors now face in the mainstream media environment.

# Page 8
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3428><y_0.4148>abvacy group in Los Angeles, in the summer of zoon. This fieldwork and the formal interviews and informal conversations that owned provided a useful context for understanding the social climate in which Latina and Latino actors have worked on the last several decades and currently work within the film and other entertainment industries.
In chapter 2, “Latina Lewis and American Accente Dolores Del Rice and Hollywood’s Transition to Sound,” Explore the opportunity experienced by a handful of Latina and Latino actors in the spaces vogue for “Latin lovers” and the subsequent domestic changes in Hollywood’s imagining of Latin- dad after the transition to sound film and the economic downturns of the space. In illustration, I survey the career and revolving star image of Mexican actress Dolores Del Rice (type-d), whose U.S. film career roughly praised the years ago to say. After her first hit film in just, at the peak of the late silent film era, Del Rio became a leading Hollywood rate. She found her opportunities shifting by the early sprays in relation to film industry notions of the American accent and the solidification of across of American wholeslems that marginalized Latinavios; however, Her peer-sound publicity and film rules illustrate the de evolution of Latina opportunity and the racialization of even light-skinned Latinavios actors in this period.
In chapter 3, “The Good Neighbies on Phase Time: Desi Arras and Love Lacy,” I surveyed Latinavio representation and racialization in the sprays and sprays as reflected in the career and star image of Cuban-born musician, ac tec, and later television producer Dan Arras (pur-d). Arras began as a singer and leader of Cuban bands in the United States and later embedded on a Hollywood career when he was ethilted as a performer in several Good Neighbor– flavored films in the sprays. He is best known, however, as the first Latino television state from his performance as Rocky Ricardo on the extremely popular television series _Love Lawy_ (type-c), opposite his red-life wife, Lucille hall. Arras also was the first Latino television executive, serving as the above's executive producer and president of Dudle Production. Exploration of Arrao’s career and star promotion thus brings up a number of questions regarding Latina and Cuban identities and U.S. racial borders as expressed in the medium of film and television in these decades.
This is followed by chapter 3, “A Flight In: ‘Digitty and Imagery’]. Elisa Moreno in Hollywood’s Postwear Era,” I return to focus on the film industry exploring Latina opportunity and star promotion during the sprays and rates. With respect to industrial shifts, this was a period line included the breakdown of the studio system and the growth of independent film production. Despite a growing awareness of nature in the United States, the film industry
remained starnably “All-American.” The impact of these trends is examined in this study of Puerto Rican preferman Rita Monols curly film career. The actors experienced many shades during this period, in particular casting seems that dictated that Latina be not only in secondary, somewhat rais—whether Latina, Asian, American holidians, or ethnic society —even after her talent was officially recognized with an Oscar win in jets for Your Side Story, I conclude with consideration of chuster and film side that Moreno portrayed in the sprays, that of Google Gomez in _The Rise_, and the question that it retains regarding the importance of Latina and Latino authorship in the construction of both Latina’s chromatic characters and star images.
In chapter 4, “The Bundes of Playing Choice Freddie Prize and Latino Stadium in ‘Elevionals Era of Relevance,” I examine shifts in Latina’s opperentation and random in the sprays, described scholars as network televissary era of “social relevance,” or the presence of Chicane and Puerto Rican sodia activities began to be felt. Chico and the Men, which aired on NBC from spray in spite offend the first Latino load ride since _Love Lawy_, as well as being the only “socially relevant” warto with a latino in a starting role. Star ing Puerto Rican and German Hungarian actor Freddie Prize as Francisco “Chief” Rodriguez, Chico and Pho Meet focused on the _Mai Graph_ painting of an older white gauge owner and Chico, the young Mexican American man who worked and lived with him. Prima’s character, notably was the subject of ongoing debate and negotiation among the producers, the network, and Chicane and other viewers, such illuminates our vending supporting network and national notions of Mexican American, Latina, and American ethnic identities in the sprays. In this chapter 7 and analysis Freddie Prize’s promotion as a star before his suicide in spray in light of the negotiations that took place on the series.
In Chapter 8, “The Face of the ‘Decade’ Edward James Olmas and Latino Films of the sales,” It can run shifts in Hollywood’s construction of Latinaidal an Latino filmmakers began to have an impact too continual level. While not the full shows “Decade of the Hispanic,” tramped by the mainstream news media, it was a period in which the first Chicano and Latino-belined future films reached national audiences, often to critical and popular acclaims. These films included _El Marta (pith), Great Beat (path), The Radial of Gregorio Carter (path), and Raul and Fabier (path)._ Interestingly, in the press coverage that ensued about the new Latino’s filmmakers and films, Mexican American ac tor Edbon James Olmas was promoted as the primary star and as a symbol of Latina’s visibility in U.S. popular culture. I study Olmo’s tuks career and star promotion in relation to the rise of Latina’s feature filmmaking and the

# Page 9
<class_Page-header>

<x_0.3438><y_0.4078>shifting status and voice of Chicazan/ao and other Latino/o in other respects in U.S. culture.
In chapter 6, “Crossing Over the Latina Body: Jennifer Lopez and the types ‘Latin Were,” I document tapon shifts in Latino/opportunity; media representation, and our promotion in relation to the cancer and late image of Noyerian actress, singer and mella myself Jennifer Lopez during her due to mainstream station. A number of social and industrial developments provided openings that were instrumental to Lopez’s success, including the growth and a rising awareness of the Latino's audience and increased Latina’s and African American media production. An illustration of these developments but also of the continued strength of traditional topics that have long cultural Latino-site presentation. Lopez was introduced in US, and global audiences in highly body-focused promotional texts, a phenomenon that Empire. Loochude by reflecting briefly on Lopez’s subsequent states in Hollywood and the upper-class associations and ethnic flexibility that later came to dominate her image, as well as on her re-emphasis on Latino/v- focused projects in more recent years.
Finally, in Chapter 7, “Ethnic Andigny) in the Part of Dark Angels, Irvine Alba and Mixed Latino’s Trentk,” follows the question of Latina and Latin stars of mixed ethnicity. Although in the past mixed-race sizes of partial Hispanic descent typically threaded some aspect of their mixed heritage (Anthony Qustin and Raquet Welch are too with known examples of stars who were “Quoted?” In this way) currently such actors are more often “not” about their mixed ancestry. In the post-millennial era, they also happen to be among the most successful Latino’s stars. What are the implications with respect to historical and contemporary notions of Latinoidal in Hollywood and the United States, when many of today’s Latina and Latin stars, such as Freddie Power Jr, Selina Hurek, and Pequeem Brent, art of partial Hispanic descent? Through exploration of the careers of mixed Latina action Josica Alba and Rosato’s Howard, Lepoculate or the significance of the contemporary broadening of notions of Latina’s identity as constructed by the Hollywood media industries, by Latina’s and other media professionals, and by audiences themselves.
1 Latin Lovers and American Accents
Group to the local complex or turning on the television with the hope of finding Latina and Latin actors featured in starting roles can be a more fascinating experience those days than it was just a few decades ago. Today we might happen upon a variety of actors of Latina’s and Latin American descent, among those America Ferreira, Rencias del Tom, Rosato’s Theoreon, Michelle Rodriguez, or Diego Lima, to name a few playing film and televi- sion characters that are reliably textured and not predicted on the old stancily streetotypes. Codystry publicity women such as entertainment news shows and supermarket adminis also heavily feature Latino’s scene Jennifer Lopez, Wilson’ Midstream, and Fox Longeria Feder, among others, have made regular appearances in recent years. It’s a shift from what was the norm even two decades ago, where Latina’s actors move typically struggled with extremely limited roles and casting opportunities.
Taking this historical survey of Latina’s participation in Hollywood film back even further reveals that the types," Latin Explosion" was only the most recent wave of Latina’s global standard, however. There was another era, now often forgotten, in which Latin and Latin actors were hired so that perceived bus offer potential, viewed an especially attractive and friendly and promoted an international gain. In the mid- to last space, known as the Golden Age of UK client film, a number of actors of Latina’s decent were among the step sizes at their respective studies and in the film industry areas generally. This first, Latin impassies," on the film fan magazine. Photography described the telling of Hispanic actors in yaws provided opportunities for a handful of actors that has only recently been marked Across from Mecco
_Bolores Del Rio and Hollywood’s Transition to Sound_